docs: add starter for plugins with new plugin recipes (#22258)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/recipes/working-with-plugins.md

---
title: "Recipes: Working with Plugins"
tableOfContentsDepth: 1
---

A [Gatsby plugin](/docs/what-is-a-plugin/) abstracts Gatsby APIs into an installable package. This means that modular chunks of Gatsby functionality isn’t directly written into your project, but rather versioned, centrally managed, and installed as a dependency. You can add external data, transform data, add third-party services (e.g. Google Analytics, Stripe), and more.

## Using a plugin

Found a plugin you'd like to use on your project? Awesome! You can configure it for use by following the steps below. This recipe uses the [`gatsby-source-filesystem` plugin](/plugins/gatsby-source-filesystem) as the example because it is one of the most popular commonly used plugins.

> > If you'd like to take a look at the available plugins you can install, check out the [plugin library](/plugins).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you'd like to take a look at available plugins, check out the [plugin library](/plugins).
```

### Prerequisites

- An existing [Gatsby site](/docs/quick-start/) with a `gatsby-config.js` file

### Directions

1. Install the `gatsby-source-filesystem` plugin by running the following command:

```shell
npm install gatsby-source-filesystem
```

2. Add the plugin to your `gatsby.config.js`, and set any options it needs, the filesystem source plugin takes a `name` and `path` as options:

```javascript:title=gatsby-config.js
module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    // highlight-start
    {
      resolve: `gatsby-source-filesystem`,
      options: {
        name: `images`,
        path: `${__dirname}/src/images`,
      },
    },
    // highlight-end
  ],
}
```

> _The instructions found in the README of the plugin you're using can you help you determine specifics about what configurations (if any) it requires. For this example to have an effect in your own site, you would need a folder of files at `src/images`._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_The instructions found in the README of the plugin you're using can you help you determine specifics about what configurations (if any) it requires. For this example to have an effect in your own site, you would need to create the `src/images` folder and place files inside of it._
```

Reviewer: Is it worth noting that not all plugins have options? Or no because this is a recipe and specific example?

Author: I suppose I sort of hinted at that:

> what configurations (if any) it requires

That still might not be super clear though 🤔

Reviewer: Ah, that's a good point. Maybe instead of "if any" there could be a note call out mentioning that not all plugins have them? The if any might also be enough, I just missed it.

3. Run `gatsby develop`, your plugin should run as your site builds.

### Additional resources

> - Learn more about configuring options or using default options in the [Using a Plugin in Your Site](/docs/using-a-plugin-in-your-site/) guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Learn more about configuring options or using default options in the [Using a Plugin in Your Site](/docs/using-a-plugin-in-your-site/) guide.
```

> - See an example Gatsby site using this configuration in [the repo for the default Gatsby starter](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-default/blob/master/gatsby-config.js)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- See an example Gatsby site using this configuration in [the repo for the default Gatsby starter](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-default/blob/master/gatsby-config.js).
```

## Creating a new plugin using a plugin starter

> If you want to create your own plugin with the minimal boilerplate Gatsby looks for in a plugin, you can get one started with the Gatsby plugin starter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to create your own plugin you can get started with the Gatsby plugin starter.
```

### Prerequisites

- An existing [Gatsby site](/docs/quick-start/) with a `gatsby-config.js` file

### Directions

1. _Outside_ of your Gatsby site, generate a new plugin based on the starter using the `gatsby new` command:

```shell
gatsby new my-plugin https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-plugin
```

The directory structure should look something like this:

```
gatsby-site
└── gatsby-config.js
└── src
    ├── components
    └── pages
my-plugin
├── gatsby-browser.js
├── gatsby-node.js
├── gatsby-ssr.js
├── index.js
└── package.json
```

> 2. Add the plugin to your site's `gatsby-config.js`, linking it your local plugin's root folder with `require.resolve`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the plugin to your site's `gatsby-config.js`, linking it to your local plugin's root folder with `require.resolve`:
```
Worth mentioning that the name matches the directory name you used when generating it?

Author: Yes, I'll add that!!
